Introduction
Basics
toki-pona
none
The Language of Good : Toki Pona is a simple language, originally with only 120 words to work with. A handful of words of gained popularity since then, but the vocabulary remains very small. Sonja Lang created the language with the intention of simplifying thought into its most pure form. Without any of the extra fancy words a natural language like English provides, you are forced to more directly say what you mean. Minimalism is the core of Toki Pona. §§With such a limited amount of words to choose from, you have to get creative with how you communicate ideas. For example, the language doesn't provide a word for 'friend', but you can instead say 'jan pona' (literally: good person). If you wanted to say you're hungry, you could say you 'wile moku', meaning 'need to eat'.
The Ambiguity of Words : Because of the language's small vocabulary, its words must have broad meanings. For example, the word 'kulupu' could mean a community, a society, a group, a collection, a team, or a crowd. The word 'lawa' could mean head, mind/brain, a government, a leader, a rule, to control, or to lead. The word 'moli' could mean death, dead, to die, dying, to kill, or to murder.
Flexibility : The inherent ambiguity in Toki Pona words makes the language very flexible. There are numerous ways to communicate the same idea, and all are equally correct. For example, if you wanted to say 'coffee', you might say 'telo pimeja' (dark/brown liquid), 'telo wawa' (strong liquid), or even 'telo pi lape ala' (liquid of not sleeping).
Nouns, Verbs, Adjectives, Adverbs... : Most words in Toki Pona can be used as a noun, verb, adjective, or adverb. For example, the word 'moku' could mean eat, food, or even food-like if you're creative. You as the listener will have to use context to interpret which part of speech a word is being used as.
Tense in Toki Pona : Verbs do not have tense in Toki Pona like they do in English. 'ona li moku' could mean 'she eats', 'she is eating', 'she ate', or 'she will eat'. You will learn later how to specify tense, but you will not have to change the verbs.

Pronounciation & Spelling
Basics
kalama
none
Letters : Toki Pona uses 14 letters:§a, e, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, s, t, u, w
Consonant pronunciation : Consonants are pronounced exactly the same as in English with only one exception. The letter 'j' is pronounced like an English 'y'.
Vowel pronunciation : The five vowels of Toki Pona are pronounced similarly to those of Spanish, Japanese, and Esperanto.§§a: pronounced like the 'ah' in 'father'§e: pronounced like the 'eh' in 'red'§i: pronounced like the 'ee' in 'need'§o: pronounced like the 'oh' in 'so'§u: pronounced like the 'oo' in 'mood'§
Pronunciation flexibility : The language's small collection of sounds gives a greater freedom to how you can pronounce words. For example, you could pronounce the word 'toki' as 'dogi' and you'd still be correct.
Writing : Toki Pona uses exclusively lowercase letters, with the only exception being loan words, such as names of people and places. It is typically written in the latin script, but also has its own writing system called 'sitelen pona' (literally: good writing), which is made up of glyphs that represent different words. Toki Pona can be written in any script you want.

Pronouns & Particles
Basics
mi
mi, sina, ona, ni, li, e, mije, meli, jan, moku
What is a pronoun? : A pronoun is a word we use to refer to something/someone without using its name. For example, in English we use the word 'you' to refer to someone we are talking to. If you were talking to a friend named Jane, you would usually say 'you are my friend' instead of 'Jane is my friend'. Pronouns help keep the flow of a conversation.
Pronouns in Toki Pona : There are only four pronouns in Toki Pona.§§mi, the first person pronoun§sina, the second person pronoun§ona, the third person pronoun§ni, meaning this, that, these, or those§§Unlike English, pronouns in Toki Pona aren't seperated based on gender or plurality. 'mi' is the only first person pronoun, being used for both 'I' and 'we'. 'sina' is, like modern day English, the only second person pronoun. 'ona' is the only third person pronoun, being used for 'he', 'she', 'they', and 'it'.
What is a particle? : A particle is a word that carries a grammatical meaning when it's used with another word. One example is the word 'not', which is a negation particle, making whatever it's paired with negative. Another example is the word 'to' when used before a verb. §§Particles are used much more in Toki Pona than they are in English. Two of the most important particles are 'li' and 'e'.
The particle 'li' : The particle 'li' is typically used before the verb of an object. For example, if you wanted to say 'she eats', you could say 'ona li moku'. Since there is no verb for 'to be' in Toki Pona, 'li' can also be used for this. If you wanted to say 'he is a man', you could say 'ona li mije', if you wanted to say 'she is a woman', you could say 'ona li meli', and if you wanted to say 'they are a person', you could say 'ona li jan'. Notice how the pronoun 'ona' is used for each of those sentences, because pronouns in Toki Pona don't change based on gender. However, 'li' is not used in the first or second person, so if you wanted to say 'I eat', you would say 'mi moku' and not 'mi li moku'. Never use 'li' with 'mi' or 'sina'!
The particle 'e' : The particle 'e' is used to introduce the direct object in a sentence, meaning the object that is having something done to it by the subject. It is used after the verb in a sentence. For example, if you wanted to say 'she eats this', you could say 'ona li moku e ni'. The particle 'e' is being used to introduce the direct object, 'ni' (meaning this).
